## Attending

- @RangerMauve
- @mkroehnert
- @achou11
- @frando
- @jalcine

## Notes

### Intros

- Mauve, knows JS and hyper stack, not much rust
- Andrew: In New York City. Working at digidem, not as into rust but into learning more, wants to know about going past hypercore in JS, what kind of work would be needed for a protocol spec? So other could reference to know how to implement stuff
- Timo: In finland. Dabbling with hypercore rust and automerge rust for local / small web stuff. Hoping to bundle those togheter.. Interested in hypercore10 for the multiwriter, looking at WASM builds. Want to bundle hypercore in own rust interface, hypercore and rust doesn't make sense when you have JS. Have some time in spring to do stuff, not super good at rust, 6-8 montsh with it.
- Manfred: Also in EU, tried out Beaker in the past, followed this because it's interesting. Professionally not working with anything web or JS related, in automotive and simulation topics, first in uni for robotics, now into simulation. mostly C++ (20 y), some python, low level microcontroller stuff. Following rust after the 1.0 release, have a tiny bit of experience (made a game on itch: https://centralgamingsystem.itch.io/unflock), heavy workload right now, not much time consecutively, maybe do stuff with low time pressure
- Jacky: East coast, generally into indie web, into web 2.2 (hypercore), rust has been go-to for 2 ish years, before elixir and python
- Franz: (frando) live in Germany, do open source software, working at a local community radio station, was doing work on hypercore protocol in rust, worked with the JS stack, building search engine for audio files with voice transcription

## Discussions

Q: Jacky: Should we support Hypercore 9?
A: Ward: won't be supported, might as well start with 10

Franz: It's an incremental change, it might be breaking, but it's like an addition thing. Don't have to be fully compatible to be compatible with other peers, hyperswarm is a totally new protocol now, also much less implemented in rust. There's some code, but lots of stuff is miss. Hypercore storage stuff is the part that can most easily be skipped, the wire part (that franz worked on) that part has breaking changes, the wire encoding changed significantly between 9 and 10. In the existing repo it was using protocol buffers, in hypercore-next they switched the encoding to [something custom that matthias wrote](https://github.com/compact-encoding), a custom binary scheme, simple: ints and strings and bytes appended to each other. With protocol buffers had schema files and could read the layout and reimplement, compact-encoding is simple but custom, no existing implementation. To get hold of the actual messages you need to read the JS source code for the encoding types. The onlt reference is the JS. Won't be hard to implement the actual parsing, but would have to think about actually constructing it. Similar to how we do in JS with manual parsing? Something higher level? THe logic for exchanging messages is more or less similar, channel part moved to hyperswarm, it handles multiplexing? Not 100% sure

Jacky: Good context. Hyperswarm blocking (?)

manfred: Is libp2p linked, is it different?
franz: It's by IPFS and filecoin. Parts also used by pairityy, they do blockchain. Lots of blockchains use it, main devs are IPFS and filecoin

Jacky: Could it slow down, have an RFP?

Mauve: Unlikely, they like being heads down and just working on stuff
Franz: Probably same. Won't know stability until they announce something. These days don't care as much about the nodejs compat. More interested in a reliable p2p stack, currently there's no module or crate that works for hyperswarm at all, the great part is that "it just works" (for connectivity), whenever I ran it I got the encrypted channels and can throw whatever on top of it. That doesn't exist in Rust. The API is great, limited and top level but powerful. Getting the next hyperswarm to rust would be great even if the hypercore peple decided to go to a new hyperswarm and broke something again. If we have a working stack by then, and actually has the properties of the node.js stack, I wouldn't care. WIth that API it'd be enough for the tools people would want to build. Id on't think the top level design would change much. Maybe additions, but not much breaking from last to the enxt one. There's the new ability to connect by public key, still have joining topics.

Ward: Anyone tried the libp2p DHT, it's not as reliable as hyperswarm. Do you want the same features as hyperswarm or just opening the connection? Even withoiut the nice hyperswarm features and hypercore just being able to open connections is useful and reliable on its own. If we have just that working. Is the DHT on its own enough

Franz: I think the DHT + MDNS (local networks) + UTP connections + hole punching (quite important). IPFS works on servers a lot, but random computers really needs the hole punching part. IPv6 might change things? (better hole punching).

Mauve: WHo cares about backwards compat with Node (swarm and hyprcore):

- Andrew: don't think it's realistic to catch up and always be on top, if it works and has a nice APi that'd be more realistic. Not hopeful of protocol spec.
- Jacky: I was hoping for compatibility, at least would be my personal checklist. As it stabilizes on the rust side, could do more interesting things and could influence the JS side
- Manfred: Might make sense to have compat, I have flaky internet provider, crappy ipv6, main goal was to look into hyperswarm, getting out of home network to people in other locations. Would be cool to embed rust imple into node
- Timo: Understand chasing after JS hard. If we start now, it's natural to start with v10. We could focus on 10 even if the JS gets to 11. If JS is faster it's faster if not that works too.
- Manfred: One question from tech point of view: Does hyperswarm need external servers?
- Mauve: Down to contribute server space to keeping bootstrap servers on
- Ward: Nice thing is it's not global so you don''t need to store the data on others nodes, the scale of the network effect is as relevant. I don't think it's so big that you need to rely on all of it. We could create the number of nodes with our implementation. Don't think rust will be the same speed, the node version is pretty fast. Interested in integration with Rust. JS is hard to integrate with, hundred modules, hard to put together to build an app. would be nice to be easier for Rust. Been talking to folks with IPFS experience, took them a while to convince that hyperswarm was any difference. Even getting started from examples is hard. Focused less on speed, network effects of IPFS would win since there's more funding. Cool thing about hypercore and hyperswarm, don't need as much of a network as long as the DHT works. Also want to learn Rust
- Andrew: One thing that got me interested, at digidem we need to worry about using hypercore on mobile devices, need to use nodejs-mobile, created a lot of headaches, oteher impls might make the target easier? Distant, but excited about options.
- Jacky: Make a hyper-sdk in rust?

## Current state:

https://github.com/mattsse/hyperswarm-dht

https://github.com/datrs/hyperswarm-rs

https://github.com/datrs/hypercore-protocol-rs (v9 implementation)

https://github.com/datrs/hyperspace-rs

https://github.com/johsunds/libutp-rs

https://github.com/Distributed-EPFL/tokio-utp

## Existing stuff

### Hypercore

https://github.com/datrs/hypercore

- [x] SLEEP file encoding
- [x] Signatures
- [ ] Might have bugs and missing features for disk loading
- [ ] Oplog from hypercore 10
  - [ ] Need to understand
  - [ ] Saving to disk
  - [ ] Implementing truncation
  - [ ] Store data from multiple peers?

### Hypercore-protocol enoding

### Compact-encoding lbirary

- Need to create rust implementation

### Hyperswarm

### DHT

https://github.com/mattsse/hyperswarm-dht

- [ ] dht-rpc initial implementation
- [ ] New encryption stuff
- [ ] Hole punching
  - [ ] Look at what changes are needed, really understand it
- [ ] New streams API
- [ ] CreateServer?

### Next steps

Mauve: Who's intersted in figuring stuff out?
Jacky: Intersted in the wire protocol, down to open a repo and collaborate
Franz: DOwn to join a sourcecode reading session
Andrew: Into a source code reading, even if I don't work on implementations
Ward: I dig into the DHT for my job, if someone has stuff to look in depth can join. Can figure out how encoding and cyprography works. Read most of the DHT (new version), familiar with dependencies (kademlia)
Manfred: Down to join (also if it's a combined session)
Ward: Might want tos tart at dht-rpc, the encoding is pretty straightforward, encryption is libsodium with namespacing, no idea how they do other stuff like MDNS, might look at that as well.

## Summary

- Introduced ourselves
- Talked about existing state of the codebase
- Talked about alternatives like libp2p (why we aren't using it)
- Going to focus on hyperswarm DHT to start and then new hypercore functionality
- Going to start organizing ourselves, jacky will start a repo to track our organizing efforts
- Ward is going to put together a list of modules we should look into
- We're going to have another meeting where we read through code together to understand it
